Jazz Gillum's "Good Old 51 Highway" is a fine example of the 30's Chicago blues style known as "the Bluebird Beat". Named after Victor's susbidiary blues label,it combined elements of vaudeville-based "classic" and Mississippi Delta country blues. It is conventionally understood as reflecting aspirations to urbanity inflected with sentimental nostalgia for rural origins by recent African-American transplants to Chicago from the Missisippi Delta. This seems sociologically naive and the assumed dichotomy between the urbane and the rustic is unconvincing. The stylistic fusion is certainly there but it seems more like a dialog between two nuanced, sophisticated musical genres and cultural milieus. The eduring appeal of artists like Gillum, Sonny Boy Williamson I, Washboard Sam, and  Big Maceo among several others was their ability to take advantage of urbanisms such as regulated formal musical structures, and clever poular songwriting strategies without diluting the expressive power,folkoric reservoir, or subtle craft characteristic of their "downhome" delta sources.

Gillum's understated vocal delivery exhibits not urban coolness but skillfully modulated feelings of heartbreak,humilation and raw anger. His falsetto,warbling harmonica lines poise contemporary jazz trumpet and clarinet influences on a deep foundation of southern rural blues and string band harmonica conventions. More than any other lyrics in this playlist, Gillum's display careful linear development and also cover the common themes of estranged love, means of travel, destitution, and death in readily coherent and uniquely clever ways.

This story is the only one in the playlist to begin with his woman talking. Bending convention, it is not Gillum that "woke up this morning" in verse 1, but his "baby". Another original twist is that she announces to him that she's the one hitting the road. Without identifying what caused the estrangement, verse 2 compounds the qualified suggestion of Gillum's bewilderment in verse 1 with the sting of public humiliation: she refuses to talk to the him and asks her friends for directions to the highway. Verse 3 relates that the means of travel this time is hitch-hiking -- presumably because Gillum is broke -- and hint at his premonitions of failure to reconnect. He only feels like doing it and his characterization of the action as sitting down on the highway telegraphs no confidence that he's going to find her. Verse 4,expands on this feeling of frustrated indolence and charts its progression to violent yet impotent rage. The "machine" he doesn't have suggests a few things at once: a gun, an automobile (perhaps a steamroller), and a properly functioning penis. 

Vocals --
As the moniker "Jazz" would suggest, Gillum was influenced by the popular music of the time. There are certaily precedents for his understated, slightly nasal vocal style in  earlier Mississippi delta blues. If he was also aspiring to a current jazz vocal style it would be the honeyed, nonchalant, yawn of Jack Teagarden and not the incendiary,hoarse, grittiness 
of Louis Armstrong.


my baby worke up this morning    and she said she was highway bound
yes...
she wanted to find number 51     that's the main highway out of town


she wouldn't even talk to me     didn't have a word to say
she asked all her friends        where she could find 51 highway

well i feel like takin may suitcase and sittin' down on that lonesome highway
so if she lives out on highway number 51 i'll overtake her just before day

if i had my machine   i wouldn't worry about her leaving town
cause i'd hit that 51 highway, lord know i'd roll that highway down

Keeping with the urbane patina this blues style promoted, Gillum fashions a retributive lyric that civilizes the "I'm gonna kill my baby if she don't stop cheatin' and lyin" rural common stock lurking beneath the surface. Distracts with cleverness and subtlety from the brutal intent expressed.