Lyrics
------

1
I'm gonna get up in the mornin' goin' down highway 51
Get up in the mornin' goin' down highway 51
Miss Fannie Mae my sweet woman and she don't pay me no mind

Yeah she left  this mornin' and she rode that B&O ( humming )
Yes she left me and she rode that B&0 ( whistling )
When she was leavin' (lord, lord, lord ) she wouldn't even -- lord -- shake my hand

Someday I'll meet you when your troubles get like mine....

Lyrics
-------
Hooker's story about "Highway 51" sounds like improvised reportage,
telegraphing themes of travel,estrangement,abandonment and retribution. Emotional neglect -- not passionate pursuit -- leads him down the  asphalt. His lover takes off too, catching a train for destinations and reasons unknown;but the telling detail that she wouldn't even shake the spurned singer's hand in verse 2 might be his unspoken admission that "mistakes were made". Tacit admission of guilt in this case doesn't neccesarily imply remorse. At song's end, Hooker's sneering prediction that she will meet him again "when your troubles get like mine" conveys a desire for retribution, not reconciliation.

Performance Characteristics
----------------------------
Hooker was a fearless adept at performing without a structural net. Though the lyric AAB form  in Highway 51 is followed through most the song, it ahderes to no regular metric structure and dispenses with end rhymes. As with many solo blues performers, form follows unmetered antiphonal dialogue between voice and instrument. This dialogue gets particularly rich in the second verse when Hooker complements his guitar lines answering the vocals with unison wordless humming, then whistling. The single line third verse sounds deliberate, not incomplete. His key structural discipline is the rock solid tempo and groove pumped out with his foot: all the free energy roiling in this performance flows from that. 

There is an understandable but hobbling tendency for reviewers to characterize Hooker's style as raw and primitive. Michael Gray provides a nuanced case for this characterization and its contrary, describing Hooker's performance  approach as a "shambling style that seemed as old as voodoo chants yet always managed to sound modern and knowing" (encyc page 328).

Connections to Dylan
----------------------
Though Dylan's version of "Highway 51" bears no obvious resemblance to Hooker's, it's possible Dylan was encouraged in taking a flexible approach to song structure after hearing Hooker live frequently during  his early years in the village. One of his first big breaks was being billed as Hooker's opening act for two weeks in April of 1961 at Gerde's Folk City. Dylan's friend Sybil Weinberger said that "Dylan loved Hooker and that whenever he was playng, Bob would there" (Gray, encyc 329). Hooker had this to say about Dylan in 1985:
"I met him when I was playing in the coffeehouses. He wasn't famous then but he came by to see me. We played some shows together and he'd come back to my place and we'd stay up all night playin' and drinkin' wine." (Gray, encyc 329)

There was a professional connection too: both Dylan and Hooker were managed by Albert Grossman, the shrewed, hard-nosed businessman credited with enabling Dylan's tremendous commercial success in the 1960's.






The two full verses follow the conventional AAB blues lyric form without end rhymes. The last 
The expressive power of the lyrics is more about the performance than the words 




